---
layout: post
title: Role-based access control
---

* [What is role-based access control?](#what-is-role-based-access-control)
* [Understanding transactions](#understanding-transactions)
* [Limitations of transactions](#limitations-of-transactions)
* [Role grants](#role-grants)

## What is role-based access control?

In situations like computer security and physical access controls to large buildings, there are a lot of sensitive and value resources and a lot of people (and code) interacting with them. It's important to have a single place to define all the access control rules. It's also important to be able to easily modify the access rules, and to have control over how the rules can be changed. RBAC has been proven by long experience to be a good solution to these types of large-scale access control problems. 

A typical interaction with RBAC works like this. A user (human or code) attempts to access a protected resource, such as a locked door or a vault full of money. A "controller" device, such as an automatic door lock, determines who the user is and what action she is trying to perform. The controller device doesn't itself know whether the access should be allowed or not; it decides by sending a query to an RBAC system. The query includes: who wants access, what she wants access to, and what type of access is requested. The RBAC system answers the query with a "yes" or "no", and the controller responds accordingly (e.g. by opening the door).

## Understanding transactions

The primary function of an RBAC system is to answer questions which are posed in the form:

    Does role X have privilege Y on resource Z?
    
The "role" is the person or thing which is attempting to take the action. The "privilege" is the name of the action that the role is taking. And the "resource" is the thing that is protected. This type of permission check is called a **transaction**.

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/tx_1.html" height="300" %}

`X`, `Y` and `Z` in the transaction query are just symbols, the RBAC engine doesn't care whether role X is a user or a group, whether privilege Y is "create", "update", or "fryolate", nor whether resource Z is a door, a server, a bank account, a decryption key, or a waffle. Just like you can put any kind of data you want into a database or a mathematical equation, you can use role-based access control to model any kind of permission check that follows the transaction form.

Again, `X`, `Y`, and `Z` are just arbitrary names (or "ids", or "symbols", if you prefer). 

In practical situations, the role is one of the following:

* A human user
* A computer program (code) or robot
* A grouping (set) of any/all of the above

The simplest way to build an RBAC system is to store a list of all the transactions that are allowed. 

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/tx_2.html" %}

Then, when a role is attempting to access a protected resource, a control program submits a query to the RBAC. The query is submitted in the form of the transaction that is being attempted. To answer the query, the RBAC system looks through its list of allowed transactions. If it finds a match, it responds with `yes`. Otherwise, it answers `no`.

* Can `Alice` (a person) `open` the `front door`?
  * `yes`
* Can `Bob` (a person) `open` the `front door`?
  * `no`
* Can the `IRS` (computer code) `withdraw` the `money`?
  * `yes`

## Limitations of transactions

So far we've described a system that implements RBAC by storing every valid transaction in a database. This works OK when there are only a few transactions to list, but RBAC is designed for use in very large systems with hundreds of thousands of roles, privileges and resources. What happens if we try and store permissions between thousands of roles and thousands of resources? 

Suppose you have about `N` number of roles and `M` number of resources. Then roughly speaking, the number of transactions you store in your system is going to be `N * M`.

If `N = 10,000` and `M = 10,000`, then `N * M = 100,000,000`. That is a lot of rules to store for a number of roles and resources that is actually, in computer terms, not that big. 

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/tx_multiply.html" %}

This is only 12 roles and 12 resources and it's already starting to look pretty unmanagable.

## Role grants

What to do? Well, in a real world scenario, if you look at the permissions a lot of them are usually pretty redundant. For example, if Alice, Bob and Dave are all doing the same job, then in the naive case each of them will have identical permission grants. 

So in addition to transactions, the additional idea of RBAC is to model "jobs" as roles, and store the permissions job-by-job rather than user-by-user. Then, a "role grant" is used to assign individual users to their jobs. In RBAC, role grants are used to enable a role to "inherit" the privileges of another. 

In the explanation of transactions, we explored how an RBAC system can keep a list of every allowed transaction, and then answer queries about which transaction is allowed or not. We can make this list of transactions stored by the RBAC system much smaller and easier to manage by removing duplication. For example, if role `A` has privilege `X` on resource `Y` and role `B` also has it, we can create a new role `P` and give it permission `X` on resource `Y`. Then we can **grant** role `P` to roles `A` and `B`. We've replaced two permission grants with one permission grant and a role grant. 

When you draw roles connected together by role grants, you get a tree:

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/role_tree_1.html" %}

Actually, it's a directed acyclic graph, because:

1. A role **can** be a member of more than one role.
2. There **cannot** be any cycles in the graph; following the members of a role can't lead you back to the role itself.

In the diagram above, roles `B` and `C` have been granted to role `A`. `P`, `Q`, and `R` have been granted to role `B`, etc.

If you are the manager of an RBAC system, you don’t want to have to repeat the same privileges over and over. You don’t want to say "Alice can open the door, and Bob can open the door, and Carol can open the door". You want to say, "Employees can open the door, and "Alice, Bob, and Carol are employees”. That’s common sense, and that’s what role grants do for you.

Let's create Alice, Bob and Carol along with the "employees" group, then add the permission:

    Employees can open the door    

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/role_tree_2.html" %}

Because role `employees` is granted to roles `Alice`, `Bob`, and `Carol`, they can all open the door!

One way to think of this is:

    Alice is an employee, and employees can open the door. 

The RBAC "role grant" conveys establishes that `alice` "is an" `employee`. In role-based access control, a role has all the permissions explicitly given to it, plus the permissions of all its granted roles. 

Here's a little more complex example of a role graph. Try moving your mouse over a role, and the graph will highlight all the roles which the selected role "has". This is determined by following all the role membership arrows that emanate from the role you're hovering over.

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/role_tree_3.html" %}

Because all the roles in this example have the role `employees`, they can all open the door. 

## Defining roles for jobs

In the example above, we've attached the door-opening privilege to the role `employees`. However, we alluded earlier to a better way to manage roles by defining "jobs".

In this case, the job to be done is opening the door. So, define a role called `openers` and give it permission to open the door. Then select which other roles should have the `openers` role. 

Here's an example of how this is useful. Suppose we want to hire some third-party contractors and give them access to the building. We don't want to make them `employees` though. By having an `openers` role, we can grant `openers` to `contractors`, and give the contractors the privilege they need without polluting our `employees` role.

When we hire Charlie the contractor, he gains the privilege of opening the door.

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/job_role_1.html" %}

## Role-resource duality - "Rolsources"

When creating RBAC rules, it's sometimes the case that the resource we want to manage also behaves as a role.

For example, suppose you are using RBAC to control a database of users. Each user who logs into the system is a role. The system also defines RBAC "job" roles, such as a `viewer` who can inspect the attributes of each user, and `editor` who can make changes to each user. 

Consider a user `alice` who is an `viewer`. `alice` has `view` permission on all users in the system: `alice` (herself) and `bob`.

{% include graphic.md name="2018-02-28-rbac/rolsource_1.html" %}

In this diagram, the role `alice` represents the ability of the user `alice` to perform actions, and the resource `alice` models the ability of other roles to perform actions on the database record which represents `alice`. 

In other words, `alice` is both a role and a resource.

## Managing changes to RBAC

So far, we've simply presented sets of RBAC rules and examined their properties and behavior. But how are RBAC rules actually created and modified over time? Obviously, the ability to change RBAC rules is an important power, and we'd like to use RBAC itself to manage this. 

What are the privileges that we actually need to manage? First, we need to control the ability to give role grants on a role `X`. Next, we need to control the ability to grant privileges on resource `Y`. 

TODO

## Managing visibility of RBAC

When a user is accessing an RBAC system, it's desirable from a security standpoint for that user to see only the data that they need to see in order to do their job. This is a security principle called "least privilege". 

Similar to the section "Managing changes to RBAC", we want to control the ability of a role to:

* See the roles which have been granted role `X`.
* See which roles have been granted **to** role `X`.
* See which roles have privileges on resource `Y`.

TODO

## Ownership


